High in this video we're going to look at the higher order functions map and filter and then we'll also
look at the function Ziv.
These are all built in functions and they are pretty useful.
First of all let's just recall the definition of a higher order function a higher order function is
simply a function that can take another function as a parameter or it's also a function that can return
a function.
So if a function does either or both of those things it's called a higher order function.
So for example we've seen this before but the silted built in function is a higher order function because
it takes in that key parameter which is a function that allows us to change how elements and iterable
are sorted.
We also have map and filter.
These are both higher order functions as well that are built into Python.
Now there are more modern alternatives to map and filter.
We'll take a look at that in this lecture.
Pretty briefly and then we'll delve into list comprehensions and generator expressions in a later section
in the scores.
But I want to show you in this video how those two things can actually also do what map and filter does.
So let's look at the map function first.
So the map function takes one parameter.
The first parameter is a function and the second parameter is this stuff it rebels.
So start iterable is a variable number of iterable objects and fonk is simply some function.
Now the only caveat the only requirement is that phunk take out takes in as many arguments as you provide
intervals and this is because it allows us to basically take this function and apply it to the iterable.
But in parallel and I'll show you an example will become very clear what's going on there.
So math will return an iterator doesn't return a list it returns an iterator that calculates the function
func applied to each elements of the rebels pairwise or at least in parallel and the iterative stops
as soon as one of the iterable has been exhausted which means that technically you can supply iterable
that are not of the same length.
It will basically stop at the shouldest one.
So let's look at an example that will make a very clear what's going on.
Let's take a look at this list L which has three elements two three and four.
And let's define this function as Q That just returns the square of the argument x.
So now we can call a map and we can pass in Eskew as one of the functions as this is the function and
L as the one iterable.
In this case so s q has to take in just a single argument because we're only passing a single list here
a single iterable and that's the case.
That's correct.
So what it's going to do now.
It's essentially going to create four 9:16 it's going to look at each element in L and sequentially
apply Eskew to each one of the elements resulting in four 9:16.
Now remember map actually returns in an iterator.
So I just call list around it in order to actually convert it to a list so we can and will see that
in the code.
So we can print it out and see what it looks like.
So that's a very simple one.
This is a function that takes a single argument and it is applied through map to eight single iterable.
Let's look at a different one.
Let's take a look at two lists now.
One two three 10 20 and 30 and suppose that we want to add up the elements pairwise.
So we want 11 22 and thirty three as our result.
So we can use the map function for that.
Now how would we do this.
Well we're going to need an add function.
So we're going to create an add function that takes in two arguments and then we'll return the sum of
the two arguments.
So now if we map add to L1 and L2 Well map takes in two arguments and we are passing two lists in here.
So this works and it's going to basically take an element from each list L1 L2 and then pass that to
and then it will move on to the next item in L1 and L2 respectively and past that to add and so on.
And if we had an even length lists over here it would stop at the shortest length.
So if L3 let's say had three more elements we would still only end up with three elements in our result
because it would stop at 3 saying well I'm done I've exhausted that list I'm done.
So if we do that we get the answer 11 22 and 33.
Now of course we don't have to define add.
This way we could just use a lambda expression to do the same thing.
So you could do it this way.
Map the lambda X come or why this is a function that takes two arguments returns the sum of the two
and then is applied to these two sequences L1 and L2 and we get the same result.
Now let's look at the filter function filter function basically takes a single function and a single
Ederle.
So unlike the map it doesn't take an arbitrary number of intervals.
In this case it takes a single iterable.
What filter does it allows us to specify a function that determines whether we retain or throw out the
elements of that iterable.
So it is essentially a filter.
So iterable it's a single iterable funk is just a function that takes a single argument because it's
going to be applied to the iterable you know item by item and then the function if it returns true.
This means that filter will retain the element of the iterable if the function returns false or falsie
it will throw it out again.
Filter returns an iterator doesn't return a list.
It returns an iterator so we'll throw a list around it so that we can actually see what's contained
in it and it will contain all the elements of the iterable for which the function called on it is truth.
Not if the function is none you can specify none for your function then basically just looks at the
elements themselves and if they're truthy it will keep the element if the element is faulty it will
pass it out.
So that's one way of doing that by using the non function.
So let's look at an example.
Let's say we have this list.
0 1 2 3 4 0 0 0 is falsie and all the other numbers in there are truthy.
So if we were to apply none with the filter to l it's going to evaluate the first element it's falsie
it's going to toss it out.
It's not going to retain it in our result.
But one two three and for all truthy so it will retain those.
And so when we look at the list of the iterator then we actually get 1 2 3 and 4 right 0 was tossed
out.
We could also do it this way we could do this we could define this function is even which basically
just tests to see if and if.
And Mattu sorry is equal to zero.
Right.
And it is divisible by 2 means the remainder is 0.
That's an even number.
So now we could filter this list out which is even if we do this well 0 not 2 is going to be 0.
So it's going to be kept because 0 is even 1 month two however is 1.
So it's not equal to zero.
So this function would evaluate to false.
And so one would be tossed out two on the other hand too much to zero.
So this expression will be true therefore two will be kept.
And so and so we end up with 0 to come up for now of course once more.
We don't have to define the function outside.
We can just do it in line using a lambda expression that works exactly the same way.
We get 0 2 and 4 back as well.
All right so now let's move onto the zip function.
Now there's a Cancian isn't a higher order function but it's really really useful in conjunction with
higher order functions and with list comprehensions and generator expressions.
So let's take a look at the zip function has a function that takes in an arbitrary number of intervals
so it operates on iterable.
There is no function being passed in here.
Zip is not a higher order function.
It's just a function that takes multiple intervals and will return one iterable.
And what does it do.
Well it basically combines each element in the intervals kind of pairwise right one at a time.
So in this case if we zipped this up we will actually get a list or actually an iterator that will be
the tuples formed by each element of the two intervals one by one.
So one ten to twenty three thought.
It's called Zipp private that you can think of it as taking two lists and zipping them up like a zipper.
Right.
You're kind of putting it together what you end up with of tuples.
And again it will stop at the shouldest one then we'll see examples of that.
So let's take a look at another example.
Let's say we have three lists.
Remember that zip can take an arbitrary number of intervals so that we have three lists.
Well if we zip that up right if we zipped those three our lists up we're just going to get another iterable
that will contain two tuples with three elements in each.
Right.
It's going to contain one 10 and a to 20 and be three thory and see this one by one
if we have an uneven length So let's say that our thoughts iterable has one two three four five elements
and our second iterable has one to three elements.
Now we can still zip that up.
That's still going to work.
The only thing is it's going to stop at the shortest one.
So once one of the iterable is exhausted it doesn't matter what's left over in the remaining iterable
it won't show up in here.
So here we get one come at 10 to come twenty and 3Com 40 in our result.
So let's take a look at another example.
Now L-3 is the string.
But remember a string is an iterable you can iterate the characters in the string so you can think of
the string as simply the sequence of characters p y th o n so it has 1 2 3 4 5 6 characters in it L2
has four integers in it and L-1 has three integers in it.
Now we can zip that up and if we zipped that up and of course we pass it to a list so we can actually
see the result then we will get 1 10 P to 20 y three 30 T.
Now L one's been exhausted.
And so we stop at that point.
And so this is what we end up in our results right.
So it's it's actually pretty handy.
Let's see why.
Let's say that I want to find the index of the each character in the string and I want to create some
kind of list or something that tells me both the index and the character at that index.
Well it's very easy to do that.
I'll take this range and I'll make the range number here greater than the length of the string.
I could make it equal but I can make it greater than anything.
It doesn't matter because now when I zipped that up it's going to zip up the zero Come one come to cover
three up to 100.
And a b c d and i know it's going to stop once a b c d has been exhausted and so on Zipp result is 0
8 1 B to C D.
So as you can see that's really handy.
Now of course if you want to tuple the other way around if you want a common zero become a one you just
zip L2 comma L-1 right.
The sequence the older of the sequences matters in terms of how it shows up in what order it shows up
in the resulting tuples.
OK so now let's look at list comprehensions and again we'll see that in much more detail later on in
those calls.
But let's take a look at this and why it's an alternative to the map function.
Let's go back to this example.
Article 2 3 4.
And let's say that we want to return the square of each element so we want to create a list that contains
the square of each of those elements so we can do it using a map right.
We can define this function as we could of course use a lambda expression as well.
And then we map Eskew to the list L..
And so when we get that.
And of course we can use the lambda expression.
Here's the example here.
And when we get that back we get 4 9 and 16.
So that's using the map function to generate a new list.
So we had to use list then map then specify the function.
Are they using Alamdar are using this definition out here.
And then the iterable itself that whose elements we want to square we could also have done that using
a fuller.
Right.
We could start with a result which would be an empty list.
Then we can loop through every element in L..
So for x n l and then we would append x squared to this result and then if we're to print the result
out we would get the list for 9:16 write so that's another way of doing it.
This isn't using map.
This is just using regular code and regular full list comprehension is very similar to the full loop
example.
You basically have the expression here x squared.
This is what we want to return for every x and L.
So here's a loop for x n l right.
You have it right here.
The only difference is that I don't have to do a result or append.
I already have the square brackets here indicating the list.
So it's going to iterate L it's going to put each element inside the variable called X and then I can
use X in this expression here and do whatever I want with it like in this case squaring.
So when we do that we end up with four 9:16.
So this is actually a little easier to understand than this statement over here.
That's still OK.
That's pretty straightforward.
Map Eskew to L.
I know that s Q Does X squared or I can see it directly here.
It's a lambda expression that's full OK.
So in general you can write expression for Varnum and iterable and the square brackets that will create
a list.
And so that's called a list comprehension.
Let's take a look at another example.
Let's suppose that we have two lists l 1 is 1 2 3 and L2 10 20 30.
Now in this case here's my first attempt.
So I take map I take lambda X come to Y X plus Y and I apply that lambda function to l 1 and L 2.
So obviously I'm adding up the elements of each of those lists those sequences.
And then I'm generating a list back out of that.
And so we get 11:22 33.
That's the example we saw just now.
OK.
Now I want to remind you of the Zipp function.
So what happens if we zip l one L to well we end up with tuples right that are made up from the corresponding
elements of each list.
Right so 110 to 23 23:30.
So Zipp is something that becomes really really useful when we use list comprehensions because suppose
I want to write what I just did here using a list comprehension instead of using this map.
What we can do it this way we can iterate zip L-1 come in L2.
Now what are we iterated.
Well we iterating a tuple right.
And so we can put each element of the tuple into a variable name.
We've seen how to iterate before.
So for X come a y is Zipp l 1 come L 2 will get 1 in 10 in the first iteration to 20 in the second iteration
and 3 and 30 and the third and at each iteration what are we doing with summing up x plus y and then
we're putting that into a list.
And so we end up with the very same thing eleven twenty two 33 So now you may be thinking well wait
a minute.
I mean yeah.
You know what's what's something to understand the list comprehension or the math.
In this case I think it's a toss up right.
The map is pretty straightforward to understand.
Here you've got the Zipp that kind of came in between that you otherwise would have been you know much
cleaner.
But up to you to decide which approach you want to take.
But here is another one.
Let's take a look at the filter function so let's take a look at l equals 1 2 3 4.
And we want to filter out only and only keep the even numbers.
While we've seen this before.
Right.
We can filter we can take this lambda expression that looks at whether an is even or not.
And then we apply it.
We only retain the Truthy results.
So in this case we retain two and four.
Now if you were to use a list comprehension you can do it this way.
The list comprehension has an extra piece that you can add onto it which is this if statements and the
way it works is that we are iterating X and L and we're going to return x so we're just going to take
x by itself.
We're not doing anything fancy with it but we're only going to keep those Xs those iterations where
this expression is true.
Now there was return x for x and L if X Mont. two equals zero.
So that's pretty expressive.
But again this is I think easier to understand than this filter operation here.
Again up to you how you want to do it so this will give us the same thing two and four.
And of course we're using a list comprehension so we actually get a list back we don't have to convert
it to a list.
It's already is a list.
So in general list comprehensions are built this way you first think of the iteration.
So you're going to iterate something in some iterable.
Now that something could be a single variable name.
But if you're iterating you know a tuple for example you can have multiple variable names.
Kind of depends what you are iterating.
Then you have a filter expression that only keeps this iteration if the expression over here is true.
And when that's the case then it will evaluate this expression here and that will become the element
of the new list.
And we just repeat that for every iteration.
So let's combine the two.
And this is where you'll see that using a list comprehension is actually a lot more expressive and a
lot easier to understand than using map and filter.
Let's say that I have this list here.
While it's not actually a list but it's a it's a sequence right.
Range 10 to an iterator.
And I want to do this piece of code right there.
So what's going on.
Well let's take a look.
We have a filter right which has some function applied to a list well-to to a sequence to an iterator.
What is that iterative.
Well it is self generated from map that applies the function x squared to the elements of L.
So what we're doing is we're squaring every element that's in range 10 and then we're filtering out
the elements where that square is less than 25.
We're only going to keep the elements where the square is less than 25.
So what we end up with is zero which is zero squared one square to square three square four square and
then five square is 25 that's too loud.
That gets filled it up.
And so the remaining elements of range 10.
So you certainly can figure out what's going on here.
But it takes a little bit of work.
On the other hand if you use a list comprehension Here's what it looks like.
X squared for x in range 10 if x squared is less than 25.
That is very very clear.
You don't have to really think at all in order to understand what this list comprehension is doing.
And it is of course returning the same thing.
All right.
So we'll take a look at list comprehensions and generally expressions and dictionary comprehensions
in more detail later on in the course.
But for now I wanted to start showing you how those things work and why they really an alternative to
the map in the field of higher order functions that you'll still see used quite widely by Python programs.
So let's switch to some code and let's see all that in action.